@c -*-Texinfo-*-

@chapter News

This lists the major changes to Jade and which release they occurred
in. For more explicit history information see the @file{ChangeLog} files
scattered throughout the source directories.

@section Version 4.0
Too many things to list individually. Edited highlights include:

@itemize @bullet
@item Separated the extension language (@code{librep}) from the editor

@item Redisplay algorithms have been vastly improved to totally remove
the ``flickery update'' problems. Also support for ``extents'',
property lists and local variables for buffer regions (this includes
the ability to give regions of a buffer their own major-mode)

@item Support for using GTK as the underlying window-system (instead of
raw Xlib). This adds a widget GtkJade, and a GTK Lisp binding. This
allows arbitrary GTK user-interfaces to be created, with-or-without
embedded editor windows

@item A mail user agent written in Lisp, with MIME decoder and encoder

@item A basic WWW browser; the mail reader also renders HTML

@item RCS and CVS interfaces

@item All file operations may now be redirected through Lisp code.
Current uses include tilde home-directory substitution and access to
remote files (using FTP or rcp)

@item A simple Dired-like directory browser

@item Ispell interface (interactive and asynchronous)

@item TAGS files support

@item Windows may be split vertically into several ``views'', also the
minibuffer is now a normal buffer, with keybindings, etc

@item New major modes: TeX, LaTeX, Perl, sh, Yacc

@item Many low-level improvements
@end itemize

@section Version 3.3

@itemize @bullet
@item
New command bound to @kbd{Meta-=} to count the number of words in a block
of text.

@item
More fixes to the C language parsing functions.

@item
Fill mode now binds @kbd{RET} to check if the current line needs to be
broken or not, as well as the @kbd{SPC} key.

@item
The @code{compile} command now treats the @code{compile-command} and
@code{compile-default-command} more sensibly --- it always prompts for
a command (even when @code{compile-command} is non-@code{nil}) and
only ever sets @code{compile-command}.

@item
The `jadeclient' thing works again under Unix; I forgot to update one
file when I changed another :-(

@item
The garbage collector once more prints a message while it's working.

@item
Autoloaded files have a message displayed while they're being loaded.

@item
The @kbd{.} command in asm-mode has been removed.

@item
GDB mode works once more.

@item
The Lisp compiler checks for some simple errors and produces warnings,
note that the checks it performs are @emph{extremely} minimal.

@item
Fill mode works properly with lines that contain TAB characters.

@item
The buffer-menu formats the mode list properly.
@end itemize

@section Version 3.2

@itemize @bullet
@item
The programmer's manual has finally been written.

@item
Undo; devote as much memory as you want to keep track of all modifications
to a buffer which can then be wound back.

@item
Arguments can be given to commands as they're invoked.

@item
Buffer menu for interactive buffer manipulation.

@item
An Emacs-style local variables section can be embedded in a file;
replaces the naff @samp{::jade-code::} thing.

@item
@kbd{Ctrl-k} (@code{kill-line}) works at last.

@item
Now possible to interrupt jade while it's working (i.e. to let you kill
infinite loops).

@item
The Help system now has commands to list key bindings, display
what is bound to any key sequence.

@item
Use of the Latin-1 character set is now controlled by the
minor mode @code{latin-1-mode}.

@item
Can load and save compressed (compress or gzip) files into/out of buffers
transparently when running on Unix.

@item
Transposing commands; @code{transpose-chars}, @code{transpose-words},
@code{transpose-exps}. Bound to @kbd{Ctrl-t}, @kbd{Meta-t} and
@kbd{Ctrl-Meta-t} respectively.

@item
Can now run a shell in an editor buffer, very basic (no completion) but
it works okay.

@item
Support for using gdb through the shell interface, the current frame's
source code is highlighted in a separate window.

@item
@kbd{Ctrl-z} moves to @kbd{Ctrl-W} so that @kbd{Ctrl-z} can (de)iconify the
current window.

@item
Some programs written for the previous incarnation will need
to be altered; all will have to be recompiled.
@end itemize

@section Version 3.1

@itemize @bullet
@item
Now properly supports characters which print as more than one character
(i.e. proper tabs, @samp{^L}, @samp{\123}, etc@dots{}). In general any
character can print as any sequence of up to four character-images.

@item
Doesn't expand tabs to spaces anymore, this means that loading and saving of
largish files is noticeably quicker.

@item
Files containing NUL characters can be edited (more or less) successfully.
Some commands (notably the regexp matcher) still don't like these
characters but, in the main, binary files can be edited successfully.

@item
Searching and replacing has changed, it's easier to use now and replacing
globally is built in.

@item
Many improvements to the Info viewer, not least, the dir file doesn't have
to have a tag-table anymore.

@item
Client editing. This lets you load files into a running editor from a
shell. For example, if your mailer runs an editor on the message you're
writing you can use the client to edit the message in a Jade that you are
running.

@item
The buffer prompt's completion is now controllable by the mouse as well as
the keyboard. Click the right button to complete the current word.
Double-clicking the left mouse button on one of the lines under the
@samp{::Completions::} line selects that completion.

@item
@code{text-mode} and @code{indented-text-mode} major-modes for editing
English language (as opposed to programming languages).

@item
Minor-modes. These provide small variations to the major-modes. For example,
@code{overwrite-mode} makes typed keys overwrite whatever's under the cursor.
Also included is a minor mode to do auto-filling (word wrap).

@item
On Unix, a tilde (@samp{~}) in a filename is handled properly in most cases

@item
It is now possible to Meta qualify a key press and it will pretend that you
pressed @key{ESC} then the un-Meta'd key.
@end itemize
